Tomás de Aquino of Santa María Magdalena

Cihuatecpan

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, the heavenly lady, Holy Mary, eternally virgin,

know all who see and read this document that I, Tomás

de Aquino, whose home is here in Santa María

Magdalena Cihuatecpan, even though I am ill, none-

theless my spirit and soul are tranquil and healthy. And I

truly believe in the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and

God the Holy Spirit, of just one essence. And I believe

all that the Holy Church of Rome believes. Therefore

now with invocation and supplication of God our lord, I

make and order my testament and last will. Let no one

violate it.

- First, I declare that I give my spirit and soul to God our

lord because he made it and redeemed it with his pre-

cious blood here on earth. And my body I give to the

earth because from there it came. And when my soul

leaves it, my body will be buried at our church of San

Juan Evangelista.

- Second, I declare I have made an offering: I went to

give it to our dear and honored father, prior fray Juan

Núñez, in person, and I said to him, “My dear father,

here is my voluntary offering of six pesos that I make for

no special reson; neither did I steal it, but I say that

during all the time that I have lived, our Lord gave me all

that I needed; let me likewise thus return it to him.”

- And I declare concerning my house where I have been,

which faces east, I give it to my wife, Juana Tiacapan.

Nor is anyone to take it from her. And I have (upper

stories? a two-story house?) facing toward Xochimilco;

all of it together will belong to my wife and my godchild

that I adopted (embraced), named Gaspar, child of

Marcos Morales, whose home is Coatlan Tenanco.

- And there are some chinampas on which I (paid tribute)

in the place named Tequacuilco, which count as seven,

and only with the land here at the edge of the water do

they come to be seven. I give them to my wife. And I

declare that there are 10 chinampas of mine in Tecui-

tlaapan, each one 20 (units of measure) long, next to the

field of Martín. She is just to take them, and I give them

to my wife, Juana Tiacapan. No one is to take them

from her. And I declare that my wife's children took

care of me a lot every time I was sick, and they showed

me much affection (treated me very well), and I declare

that they will remain here together with their mother.

- And concerning the upper story of mine that I men-

tioned above that I gave to my godchild Gaspar, the

wood is already old. And now I declare that my wife is

to give some small thing to the boy with which he will

be brought up, if he lives, or, if he dies....