Memorandum concerning Miguel Cerón Te-

quanqualoc of the ward of (Santa) María Magdalena

Tezcacoac

- First he declared: I begin my statement. My houses

where I have been are three; the “woman's house” which

faces west and forms the front of the house; the second,

attached to the first, which also faces west, and the third,

which faces toward Xochimilco, just a small house. I

assign it to my wife; all of it will belong to her, named
Juana Xoxopanxoco. There she is to be in charge of my

children, since it is their property and their house. Let

no one take it from them.

- And I am also giving the land here at the edge of the

water that belongs to the house, three chinampas that are

just small, not long, to my wife and children. From it

they are to get tender ears of maize, or perhaps they will

build something there. They will decide. I give it com-

pletely to them as their property. Let no one take it from

them.

- And I declare that there is a house of mine in Tianquiz-

tenco which faces east. It is to be sold, and the proceeds

will belong to me; when I die, it will be spent on me.

- And there are seven chinampas of mine on which we

(pay tribute). I give them to my wife, who is to cultivate

them, because she has children. No one is to take them

from her. She knows that she will give (the chinampas)

to them when she dies.

- And there are two chinampas of mine in Acalotenco,

(at the edge of the canal?) each one 20 (units of measure)

long, next to the field of Francisco Cihuatecpanecatl,

regidor mayor. I give them to my children, who are to

cultivate them.

- And in the place named Cueptecco there is the in-

heritance of the boy named Joaquín Centecpantli. (They

are) the chinampas that don Juan Téllez (Documents 13

and 13A), whose home was Tianquiztenco, gave him.

Let no one take them from him, because they are the

inheritance of the boy. (They are) next to the fields of

Gabriel Maldonado and Juan Otlicahuetztoc.

- And I declare that in the place called Tocititlan there is

dry land that was given me, 70 (units of measure) in

length and 20 in width. It is “ruler's (office) land” and it

was given me by means of justice. And I declare that I

divide it into two parts; I give 40 to my wife and

children, and 30 will belong to me. It is to be sold, and

with the proceeds masses will be said for me. Let no one

violate my final will on the verge of my death.

- This is all the invalid named Miguel Cerón Tequan-

qualoc said in his declaration before the women Maria

Xoco, wife of don Juan García Tlacochcalcatl tecuhtli,

and Juana Xoco, wife of the invalid.

- Done before the executors Gabriel Maldonado, Martín

de Santiago, and Antón Jacobo, alguaciles, and by order

of don Francisco Flores, alcalde, and Miguel de Ribas,

alguacil mayor. I, Juan de San Pedro, notary, wrote it.

Here I place my name and signature. Done the 5th of

August of the year 1580.

Juan de San Pedro, notary.