María, widow, of Santa María Magdalena

Cihuatecpan

- In the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God

the Holy Spirit, just one true God in whom I believe, I

begin my testament. Know all who see this document in

which I order my testament that I, María, widow, whose

husband was Francisco Quauhtli, and whose home is

here in Santa María Magdalena Cihuatecpan, first place

my spirit and soul entirely in the hands of our lord God,

because it is his creation; when I die, let him come to

take it, and let him forgive me all my sins. And I declare

that I keep no property for God our lord (I have no

goods) with which to make an offering, and let all my

(close relatives) who see and hear my testament know

this.

- To begin my statement, I declare that our house which

my late husband, named Martín Huitzilcoatl, and I,

named María, built is to be sold. Here is what worried

me and what my late husband Martín Huitzilcoatl and I

have done wrong: we borrowed four tomines in money

belonging to the ward heads and they have not been paid

back yet. And my late second husband named Francisco

Quauhtli and I borrowed a peso belonging to the ward

heads so that we could leave jail when we were both

imprisoned, with which it comes to one peso and five

(sic) tomines. And one tomín and a half belongs to

Agustín Xiuhtzin; it will also be paid back. Here is

something else I declare: I don't know about something

bad that my late husband named Francisco Quauhtli did:

he left a peso and four tomines unpaid. And now I say,

let someone go and inform my stepchild named Gaspar;

let him pay the peso and four tomines. Let him aid his

father and his mother, since they were the ones who

borrowed it. And when they went and informed him as

to what she said, he immediately replied “Very well, let

me pay it for my father and my mother if our lord God

gives me life, /f. 50r/ for I am sick too.” Thus said

Gaspar, with which he and his stepmother came to

agreement, and when she heard what he had said, his

stepmother was very reassured. And now I, the invalid

María, declare concerning our house that I said is to be

sold, that we both built, my first husband and I, that with

the proceeds in money will be paid the debt mentioned

above, our loan of one peso, five tomines. And of the

level land, only six matl of it, on which the house stands,

toward the road, my late husband himself gave one matl

to the mother of Agustín Teixpantzin. And with all that

remains from the proceeds in money from the house, let

them say masses for me. This is all I declare in my

testament. Let the house be sold promptly, and let no

one violate my testament.

Done before those who heard and are named here:

the ward heads and witnesses Martín González, tepixqui;

Pablo Gerónimo; Miguel Huantli, topile; Tomás Xochi-

hua Itzcuintzontecon; Andrés Tepal; Martín Axcan Cal-

pilcatzintli(?); and the women who heard, the first named

Juana, wife of Juan Cuetli; Bárbara, wife of Andrés Te-

pal; Luisa, wife of Agustín Teixpantzin; Juana, wife of

Andrés Xochicoatl.

- Done before the executors, Miguel García, Martín de

Santiago, Antón Jacobo, (and?) Juan (de San) Pedro. I,

whose name is mentioned just above, wrote it. Here we

place our names and signatures. This testament was

done Thursday the 25th of August of the year 1580.

Miguel García. Done before me, Juan (de San)

Pedro, appointed notary.