Melchor de Santiago of Santa María Magdalena

Atotolco

- In the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God

the Holy Spirit, just one true God in whom I believe, I

begin my testament. I am Melchor de Santiago Ecatl,

whose home is San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan in the

ward of Santa María Magdalena Tezcacoac Atotolco.

First I place my soul entirely in the hands of God our

lord; let him come and take it when he brings about my

death. Let all my close relatives who see this document

in which I order my testament so that no one violates my

words know that I keep nothing at all for God our lord (I

have no property). I declare only my house which faces

east. I say that it is to be torn down and sold, and with

whatever the proceeds are in money masses will be said

for us two, my wife and me. And perhaps someone will

want to buy all the old wood inside that house and the

old (...?). All of it is not worth much; however much is

collected will belong to us in order for masses to be said

with it.

- And I declare that three metates are to be sold, and one

metal-tipped digging stick is to be sold, and the old

house facing west, which has just one wing roofed and

on one side has fallen in, is also to be sold. Perhaps

someone wants to buy it. And a cuartillo's worth of

tezontle and the hard rock and all that is lying next to the

house is to be gathered together and sold. And all the

money will be put together when everything is sold, in

order for masses to be said for us with the price of all

that I have mentioned.

- And I declare that there are two willows of mine at the

entrance. They will also be sold. And as to the reeds

with which I enclosed (the property), perhaps someone

will take them apart to buy them. And there are five

chinampas belonging to me (counted as seven, by

sevens?), next to the field of Hernando Tlacocohua,

whose home is Coatlan, and there are seven in another

place, next to the field of Lázaro Tecuetz. I declare that

when the water has left (the chinampas), those in both

locations that I have mentioned are to be sold in order

for masses to be said for us, my late wife and me, with

however much the proceeds are in money.

- In addition I say that there is a field of mine in

Tetlapanaloyan which is 60 (units of measure) long and

20 wide, next to the field of the late Pablo Juárez. And

on one side is the (field) of Lorenzo Tlacochtecuhtli,

whose home is Ollopan. And there is patrimonial land

(of the) Coatlan palace (tecpan) that I was given, 60

(units of measure) long and also 60 wide. All (of the

land) that I have mentioned in both locations will be

sold. Pedro de San Nicolás knows about this; he mea-

sured the land. And with whatever the proceeds in mo-

ney are, masses will be said for us, my late wife and me.

- And I declare that there is one peso and four tomines of

my money that is kept inside the altepetl (at the council

building?) in order to complete the tithe (i.e., the altepetl

owes me the money). The juez-gobernador and Josef de

Castañeda know about it. And I say that since it is kept

there, our tribute is to be paid with it. It is to be asked

only of the mayordomos; the sacristans are not to be

asked. I kept four tomines of their money. And I say

that it is to be paid back with my upright drum that the

people of San Bartolomé are buying; they are to pay five

tomines for it. They already have (the drum) there (in

San Bartolomé). Josef /f. 61v/ de Castañeda knows

about it. And let the four tomines be given to Jacobo de

San Marcos, the sacristan; since they collected it, they

are to pay for things (and spend it on things?) at the

church.

- In addition, don Alonso de Santiago, who was notary,

gave me six tomines to keep when he went to his home

(died), and I borrowed them. And since I used them for

myself, they are to be paid back; (the money) will be

taken from the sale of some part of our property. And I

declare that if (some?) money appears, it will belong to

the church; the reason I say this is that this money had

not yet disappeared when I was mayordomo. It was just

there and it was not established whose money it was, nor

did it belong to anyone. And for this reason I say it

should be delivered to the church and not spent in vain.

- That is all I say. Let no one violate my words; no one

is ever to say anything after my time, when I am dead,

(for during all this time our lord God has visited his

mercy and justice on me. [i.e., I have become ill?]). All

of what I have mentioned and said and is written on

paper is to be carried out, nothing is to go wrong; the reason

why I say this is because we have not had the property of

others in all the time we have lived on earth, my wife

and I. No one can say anything. Done before the wit-

nesses: the ward heads Pedro Itzpancalqui and Gerónimo

Çayetihui, and the women, María Tiacapan, widow of

Hernando, and María Tiacapan, wife of Gerónimo Çaye-

tihui. Before us, Miguel Josef, Agustín Vázquez, Pedro

de San Nicolás and Diego Elías, executors.

- And I, Miguel Jacobo de Maldonado, notary of the

church, say that Melchor de Santiago ordered his tes-

tament well and truly, and I wrote it. I place here my

name and signature.

Miguel Jacobo de Maldonado, appointed notary