Vicente Xochiamatl of San Juan Bautista Ollopa

Testament

- First I declare that I, Vicente Xochiamatl, whose home

is here in San Juan Bautista Ollopan, begin (my tes-

tament). I give the house which is here facing west to

my child named Juan. It will belong to him if he lives.

And I am distributing among my children 20 magueys

that are already big. Part of them are to be sold in order

to pay the tribute. And concerning the house of two

stories, the floor (above) is to be sold and with it masses

will be said for my father. And the other floor over

which it stands, which is below, is to continue as it is,

and it will belong to the boy Juan Bautista, if he lives. If

he dies it is to be sold and torn down. And its chinam-

pas, all that I had, all of them will be for my child Juan

Bautista. There are five in Amoxcuitlac next to the field

of Antonio Mocemitoa, and in Quaxochco there are two

chinampas, each one 20 (units of measure) long, also

next to Antonio's field. I assign all of it to my child

Juan. And at the edge of the canal there are four

(chinampas), next to the field of Antonio Ayotetzin, that

go with some level land. I give them to my child named

Juan Bautista. And there is cultivated land in Huixach-

tlan, 20 (units of measure long), next to the field of

Antonio Cuitlachcoacatl; all of it will belong to my

child. In Yahualiuhcan there are 20 (units of measure of

land) next to the field of the late Pedro Acxoquauh; it

belongs to my child. Also in Yahualiuhcan there are 40

(units of measure of land) next to the field of Marcos de

León Tlacateccatl. And in Santiago (Tetla) there are 40

(units of measure of land) next to the field of the late

Cuitlachcoacatl. My child Juan Bautista is to take it all.

And there are magueys here and there; let those who

cultivate there not fool him (about them); let the ward

heads speak for me. And in Tetlapanaloyan there are

also 40 (units of measure of land) next to the field of

Miguel de Ribas; Pedro Ortiz bought them. Let him give

a little something to the child. I make Fabián Jiménez,

mason, responsible for it. And I worked in the church of

San Francisco Tequixquipan and they haven't paid me

anything yet. Let Fabián speak for me, because we both

worked there. And there is a house of mine that faces

de Luna and I agreed and he wants to buy it. He is to

west, in Chililico, which is to be sold, because Agustín

give me nine pesos, which will be its price. Masses will

be said for the two of us, my late wife and me, with it.

And concerning the purchased land in Amaxac that

belonged to my late father, 12 (chinampas), which were

the fields of the late don Juan de Aguilar, and cost eight

pesos, it will be sold and with (the proceeds) masses will

be said for my father and my mother. And in Coatlan-

tonco there are 10 (chinampas), purchased land of (my

father) that will also belong to my father and mother;

they cost five pesos. One (of the chinampas) I give to

my godchild named Gregorio Tzitzilcatoc. I worked a

field for someone for two pesos that I was paid; let the

owners come to take the maize (which is on the field).

In Quaxochco (on the border?) there are two (chinam-

pas), each one 30 (units of measure) long. The magueys

that are Chililico will belong to the ward heads, who will

speak for me.

This is all. Let no one covet of them what I said I

gave to my children, for my mother-in-law named María

Tiacapan is to care for them here. Those before whom

the testament was done are named here: Agustín Tec-

panecatl, Tomás de Aquino, Antón Cuitlachcoatl, Miguel

Totol, Pedro Chicotl, Gregorio Tzitzilcatoc, and Miguel

Tonal. Done the 27th of November of the year 1579.