Miguel Chimaltecuhtli of Santa Ana

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, the heavenly lady Holy Mary, eternally true

virgin, know all who see and read this document that I,

Miguel Chimalteuhmilnahuacatl (sic), whose home is

here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan, belonging to

the ward of Santa Ana Tepanecapan, even though I am

sick, nonetheless my spirit and soul are undisturbed and

sound. And I truly believe in the Most Holy Trinity,

Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, which are of just

one essence. And I believe all that the Holy Church of

Rome believes. Therefore now with invocation and

supplication of God our lord I make and ordain this my

testament.

- First I declare that I give my spirit and soul to our lord

God because he made it and came to redeem it with his

precious blood here on earth. And my body I give to the

earth because from there it came. And when my soul has

left it, my body will be buried at our church of San Juan

Evangelista.

- And I declare, beginning my statement, that my house

where I am, which faces west, has just one room, and its

houselot is 15 matl long and 10 matl wide. I give all of

it to my daughter named Elena Teicuh; she and my

grandchild named Matías will share it. And they will

divide the land at the edge of the water that belongs to

the house, two chinampas; each one will take one. And I

beseech my children, my daughter named Elena Teicuh

(and my grandchild) that they favor me with two masses.

- And I declare that there are seven chinampas of mine in

Ahuacatitlan; I give them to my daughter. And there are

seven chinampas of mine in a place called Ecatitlan; I

give them to my daughter Elena. No one is to take them

from her or dispute with her about them.

- And I declare that in Huixachtlan, in Xiloxochatlauhco

(in the ravine with cornflowers), I have dry land, 20

(matl) long and also 20 matl wide. I give it to my

grandchild named Matías.

- And a house of mine stands in Ahuacatitlan, with just

one room. I give it to my two children, my son named

Francisco Coanan and my daughter named Elena Teicuh;

they are to divide it between themselves. And the two

planks that I sleep on I give to my grandchild named

Matías.

- And I declare that what is planted on the chinampas, if

our lord God allows it to ripen, is to be divided into two

parts. One part is to be sold and with the proceeds in

money, masses will be said for us. With an equal

amount, our tribute will be paid so that I do not cause

bother for my children.

- And I declare that one (chinampa) is to be sold when I

die; (the proceeds) will be spent on my burial. And I

declare that there are five tecomates in the house of my

son named Juan Daniel which are valued at two tomines;

they are to be sold when I die and (the proceeds) will be

spent on me. This is all I declare.

- This is all the declaration I make, I, Miguel Chimalteuh

(sic), concerning what I distributed to my daughter and

grandchild. Before the witnesses /f. 37r/ was done this

testament. The witnesses are: Juan Lázaro, Miguel

Jacobo, tepixqui; Miguel Mizquicalcatl; Mateo Tecpan-

ecatl, alguacil; Francisco de San Gerónimo Colhua-

tecuhtli; Marcos Xochicalcatl; Mateo Yaoquizqui; Fran-

cisco Coanan; Juan Bautista, teopantlacatl; Juan Daniel;

and Martín Sánchez, the son-in-law of the invalid

Miguel Chimalteuh. And (it was done) before the wo-

men: Mecía Xoco, wife of Mateo Tecpanecatl, alguacil;

Juana Xoco, wife of Juan Lázaro; and Elena Teicuh, wife

of Martín Sánchez.

- Before the executors, Gabriel Maldonado, chief exec-

utor, and Martín de Santiago and Antón Jacobo, al-

guaciles. Since they do not know how to write, they did

not set down their names and signatures. And I, Juan de

San Pedro, notary, wrote the testament. Here I place my

name and signature. Done the 21st of the month of July

of the year 1580.

Juan de San Pedro, appointed notary.