Ana Juana of Santa Ana Tlacuilocan

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, the heavenly lady Holy Mary, know all who see

and read this document that I, Ana Juana, whose home is

here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan, in the ward of

Santa Ana Tlacuilocan, first place my spirit and soul

entirely in the hands of God our lord, because it is his

creation. When I die, let him come to take it, and let him

pardon me all my sins. And let my (close) relatives

know what the earthly property is that I keep for our lord

God. Let no one violate my statement that I put on

paper.

- Thus I begin my declaration: there is an enclosure of

mine standing beside the road that is not yet roofed. I

give it to my son named Juan Francisco. The houselot

on which (the enclosure) stands is 15 matl wide toward

Xochimilco and toward Mexico City, and in length (sic)

toward the east, it is only 10 matl. And I also give my

son an old house that stands there facing toward Xo-

chimilco. And there are three chinampas of mine next to

the house, each one 20 (units of measure) long, next to

the field of Martín Tlacochcalcatzintli. And there in the

place called Quauhtenanco there are two chinampas of

mine, each one 20 long, at the edge of the canal, next to

the field of the late Francisco Yaoxomol. And also there

is one (chinampa) of 10 matl that is at the entrance, and

three (chinampas which are) “Mexica land” (see Doc-

ument 80) in the place named Ayoc. And I give all of

these chinampas recorded here to my son Juan Francisco

because he already (pays tribute on them). Let no one

ever take them from him.

- And in Apilco there are seven chinampas of mine, each

one 20 (units) long. I declare that as long as I am ill

they are to be used for me, and when I die, let them be

sold, and with the proceeds in money I will be buried.

- And in Santiago Tetla there are 60 (units of measure)

of dry land of mine; the first part is in the place named

Icçotitlan Ohuicanpolco, next to the field of Mateo Ila-

matzin, and the second part is in the place named Texal-

pan, next to the field of Pedro Guillermo, a poor person

(orphan?) from Amantlan. And the third is in the place

named Temamatlac, next to the field of Pedro Itztolcatl,

and /f. 51r/ here in Huixachtlan there are 20 (units of

measure) of dry land of mine, next to the field of Miguel

Coltzin. I give all of this dry land which is recorded here

to my son Juan Francisco. Let no one take it from him,

because on the basis of it he will do the tribute duties, on

it he will perform the public work duty, and (give) the

hay tribute and all the various tributes.

- And here is what I say concerning my husband named

Gabriel Itzmalli, who is a great scoundrel. Let him never

bother my son, nor let him accuse (my son) of anything.

I don't know how many debts he has. He never gave me

anything whatever, not money nor telling me “poor

you,” as did the three who died, two of whom were my

husbands, because together we carried out the duties of

life on earth. But look, this one, if he went to fetch fruit

or if he went to fetch maize, he would sell it himself

without showing me how much he had bought. But as to

the maize he gave to me, he just measured it out. For

this reason I say that I am afraid (that he will do

something bad); I declare that he should not attribute

anything to my son; I beseech lord don Francisco Flores,

alcalde, to speak for (my son) and come to take him,

because (my son) is his godchild. Let him not abandon

him.

- And the house which faces toward Xochimilco that I

mentioned above that I gave to my son Juan Francisco

was the inheritance of my late sister-in-law who died.

And I say that it is not to be torn down. Let my son Juan

Francisco pay something for it; he is to offer a little

money to the church for the aid (of my sister-in-law)

before God our lord.

- And here are the debts of my husband that I have paid,

as I very well know: one peso which belongs to don

Francisco Flores, alcalde, and four tomines that belong

to his younger sister named Juana Xoco, and four to-

mines that belong to someone whose home is San Mateo.

And my husband asked me for a peso and said “I am

going to get fruit with it,” and he just collected it and

didn't buy the fruit. In all I paid four pesos. This is all

my testament which I have written (sic) and put on

paper. Done before the ward heads as witnesses: Pedro

Tecpanecatl; Martín Tlacochcalcatl Xochicuetzin; Diego

de Tapia, church attendant; Domingo Çannen; Pedro

Xochinanacaz; and before the women: Juana María,

widow of Pedro Tepanecatl; Magdalena, wife of Pedro

Tecpanecatl; Juana Tiacapan, wife of Diego de Tapia;

Ana Tiacapan, wife of (Martin) Tlacochcalcatl; Magda-

lena, wife of Domingo (Çannen); Ana Xoco, widow of

Juan Atonemac.

- Done before the executors Martín de Santiago and

Anton Jacobo, alguaciles. And I, Juan de San Pedro,

wrote the testament. (Done) also before Diego de Tapia

(sic). Done the 16th of the month of September of the

year 1580.