María Salomé of San Juan Bautista Ollopan

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, the heavenly lady Holy Mary, eternally true

virgin, know all who see and read this document that I,

María Salomé, whose home is here in Culhuacan, even

though I am ill, nonetheless my spirit and soul are

tranquil and healthy. And I truly believe in the Most

Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, that

are of just one essence. And now with invocation and

supplication of our lord God, I make and order this my

testament and will.

- First, I give my spirit and soul to our lord God because

he redeemed it with his precious blood and with his

suffering. Let him dispose of it where it pleases him.

And my body I give to the earth because from earth it

came.

- And I declare that I have a house in Coltonco which is

divided. And I declare that it is not to belong to my

child, María Ana; it is to be sold for a mass to be said

for my first husband, now deceased, Alonso Osorio. The

house and level land are divided. Juan Yaomitl and I di-

vide them between us.

- And I declare that I have a wooden grain bin that be-

longed to my deceased husband. And I say that I am

giving it to my child María Ana.

- Also I declare that as to a chest and everything inside

the house, the pots, the wood, and the two wooden pil-

lars, the two (wooden brackets), I give all of it to my

child María Ana.

- And I give the land at the edge of the water, five

(chinampas), each with 15 furrows, to my child María

Ana.

- And I say that in Amoxcuitlac there are 14 (chinampas)

of 20 rows each, and I say that I give them to my child

María Ana because they were the property of her father.

/f. 10v/ - And in Teccizco there is (land) 380 (units of

measure) long and 20 wide. And Juan Yaomitl sows

there; first he sowed eight (chinampas) that Alonso

Osorio gave him, and the second time, Alonso de Nava

gave him six, in such a way that in all, Juan Yaomitl

sows 14. And I declare that Juan García will take five

(chinampas) there that I gave him. And I give (the rest

of) this land to María Ana and to my husband, Juan

Téllez. Let him look after and speak for her.

- And in San Miguel (there is land) 140 (units) long, and

20 wide, next to the field of Francisco Xiuhtli, deceased.

And on the other side (there is land of someone else) who

is also called Francisco. And this field that I have men-

tioned I am giving to my child, already mentioned above.

- And my dry land, the cultivated field that my husband

named Alonso Osorio Huitznahuatl gave me, is in Xal-

pan, in Xiloxochitla Atlauhtenco, 210 matl long and 20

wide. And my part was 155 matl. I am giving this field

I have mentioned to my child (in) Tepantonco. And the

remaining 55 matl were given to Juan Yaomitl.

- And in Tlallachco at the entrance of Melchor Morales

there is (land) 130 matl long and 20 wide. And I declare

that Juan Yaomitl should take it. I give it to him with all

my heart.

- And in Yahualiuhcan, in the woods, (there is land) 70

(units) long and 20 wide, all together between (the lands

of) Pedro Tlacochtecuhtli. And I declare that with this

Juan Téllez is to care for the girl. I give it to him be-

cause he is my husband; he will care for her.

- And in (Santiago) Tetla, in the place called Tona-

tiuh(tzin?)co, there is (land) 60 (units) in length and 20

in width. Lucas Mimiahuatl knows about it. And this

land I am giving to my husband Juan Téllez and to the

girl María Ana. They will share it. Because she is a

female, how is she going to work it? My husband Juan

Téllez is to look out for her.