Ana Tiacapan of Santa Tepanecapan

- The will of Ana Tiacapan, wife of Pablo, whose home

is Santa Ana Tepanecapan.

- In the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God

the Holy Spirit, just one true God in whom I believe, I

begin my testament; know all who see this document in

which I order my testament that I, Ana Tiacapan, whose

home is here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan, of the

ward of Santa Ana Tepanecapan, first place my spirit

and soul entirely in the hands of God our lord because it

is his creation; when I die let him come to take it, and let

him forgive me all my sins with which I have offended

him. I keep nothing for our lord God (I have no goods)

with which to make an offering; the reason I say this is

that I am ordering my testament.

- To begin my declaration I declare that I gave four

tomines of my money to the masons who were going to

build me a wall (some walls); they were Mateo Juárez

Tecpanecatl, topile of masons, and Juan Toneuhtzin,

whose home is Tzaqualco. But I say, let my money be

brought back, and it will be spent when I die. And as to

the two houses (rooms) that my late father left, that my

younger sister Ana Xoco, wife of Pedro Tochtzin, gave

me, one facing toward Xochimilco and the other, a little

house that is inside (the complex), I declare that both

should be torn down and the stone be brought here, and

with it a house (chapel?) will be built for the image of

our Lord; my husband Pablo and my daughter María

Xoco know about this, they will do it and carry it out.

And I tore down a third little house (room) and warmed

myself with the wood; and as to the sweathouse that I

and my younger sister mentioned above share, the stone

belongs to me and it is all my inheritance; it will be sold,

and with the proceeds in money masses will be said for

me. And as to the house where I lie sick, which is

attached to a hut (jacal), I give it to my daughter whose

name is mentioned above, and I give her the hut; if she

marries somewhere, she should build herself a house

there with the wood. And I give the boat to my

daughter. But then the daughter said, “It cannot be that I

should take the boat; with all my heart I give it to my

father, because he gathers the hay (zacate) tribute with it.

He is to go about taking it.” This is all my declaration

that is written and set down on paper, the testament.

And those who heard the declaration, who were called

when the invalid fainted once, the witnesses, are named

here: the first, Mateo Juárez Tecpanecatl, Miguel Po-

pololoc, Francisco Tlamaceuh(qui); and the women: the

widow of don Pedro Moysén, named Juana; the second,

María Tlaco, wife of Francisco Tlamaceuhqui; Ana Xo-

cotzin, wife of Pedro Tochtli. This was written Sunday

at noon, the 20th of the month of November of the year

1580.

- We the executors who went to hear the declaration

place here our names and /f. 54r/ signatures to verify the

declaration and orders of the invalid. Done today, Sun-

day.

Martín de Santiago, topile. Antón Jacobo, topile. Juan

de San Pedro, notary.