Pablo Quechol of Tezcacoac

- In the name of the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and

Holy Spirit, and of (the Son's) precious mother, the

heavenly lady, know all who see and read this document

in which I order my testament that I am Pablo Quechol,

whose home is here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan,

and I belong (to the ward of) Santa María Magdalena

Tezcacoac. Even though I am ill, nonetheless my spirit

and soul are healthy and I have not lost my judgment; I

thus begin my testament.

- First I declare that I have a house that my father and

my mother gave me. It is to be sold and with the proceeds

masses will be said for us. If something is left over, the

tribute is to be paid with it. And the enclosure which

surrounds (the house) is to be sold, and masses will be

said for us with (the proceeds). And the six worked corner

stones and the stone for walls are to be (gathered together)

and all are to be sold in order that masses be said for my

father and mother. And there is a new skirt which cost

four pesos, six tomines; it is to be sold. And (there is) a

new blanket, for which was given (paid) the price of

three pesos; both things belong to me and when they are

sold, masses are to be said for me with (the proceeds).

And I am giving a simple skirt of three lengths to

Francisca Tlacoehua. I also give her a metate, and one

which belongs to me is to be sold in order that masses

be said for me. And I declare there is cacao with which

I was going to get married, two thousand beans that my

mother and father left me. And when I die, one part will

be used there (for the burial), and if some part still

remains, all of it is to be sold in order that masses be said

for me. And the 24 (piles) of firewood are also to be

sold, all for masses to be said for me with it. And there

are just five tecomates which are to be distributed among

my aunts, and two large pots for tamales are to be sold,

and if something should be borrowed from anyone on

my behalf, it will be paid back from this. There are two

chinampas. They are also to be sold, (and the money)

will belong to the sick; it will be distributed to them,

the proceeds will be devoted to them. And the seven

chinampas in Petlacontitlan are also to be sold; the

proceeds are to be divided to pay back anything that

should have been borrowed from various people on my

behalf. And also the seven chinampas in Acatzintitlan

(are to be sold) when I die; whatever should have been

borrowed will be paid back with (the proceeds). And I

say that in San Lorenzo Tetlapanaloyan there are 35

(units of measure of land) that are to be sold; with the

proceeds masses will be said for me. (They are) next to

the canal where the (image of) our dear mother, Saint

Mary, stands guard. And I declare that in Santiago

(Tetla) there are some fields which are divided in two

parts. The 40 (units of measure) above I gave to Fran-

cisca Tlacoehua. And then there are 40 below, which I

give to my nephews (and nieces?) who live in Cui-

tlahuac. Each one is to take 20. And concerning the

three reales worth of beans, one part is to be sold, and

the other part is to belong to those in Cuitlahuac, if they

come here. And the baskets (chiquihuites) and mortars

(molcajetes) that are in large pots are to be sold. And

the proceeds are to be distributed to the sick. And

concerning the old boat that is next to the water, which

belongs to the small child and which I took out (of the

water?) onto dry land, let it be divided (into planks) and

burned (sold for firewood); two boat planks are also to

be sold and (the money) spent on me. And an old jacket

is also to be sold, and (the money) will belong to the

sick. And I give a metate to Isabel. And I declare that

there is a real and a half's worth of yarn; it will be used

for the child. And there are five /f. 53v/ metal-tipped

digging sticks; the two new ones are to be sold, and the

three worn ones are (also) to be sold, and the (money)

will be spent on me. What I have declared is all my

statement. If I forgot something and it was not written

down, and if it is seen when all (my goods) are gathered

together, it will be sold and with it masses will be said

for us, for my father and my mother and me, Pablo. This

is all my declaration, all that I order on earth.

- Here are the witnesses who heard it, first don Juan

García and Francisco Atecpanecatl, church tepixque (i.e.,

plural, referring to both); Domingo Lázaro; Miguel

Rafael Çacapech; Pedro Calnahuacatl; Antonio Mimich;

Francisco Regidor Mayor (sic) Cihuatecpanecatl. And

the women: the first is Juana, widow of Cerón; María,

wife of Juan Garcia; Ana, widow of Miguel Sánchez

Tlacatecuhtli; Isabel, wife of Atecpanecatl; and Ana,

wife of Francisco Regidor Mayor. These are all who

heard it, before whom Pablo gave orders in his

testament. Before the executors-topileque, Antón

Xallacatl and Martín Tlacatecpanecatl, on the 13th day

of October of the year 1580. I, Miguel García, wrote it.