Santa María Tezcacoac Ana Tiacapan, widow of

Baltasar Nentequitl Tecpanecatl, whose home was Santa

María Asunción Amantlan

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, Holy Mary, eternally virgin, know all who see

and read this document that I am Ana Tiacapan, whose

home is here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan in the

ward of Santa María Magdalena Tezcacoac. Even

though I am ill, nonetheless my spirit and soul are calm

and healthy. And I truly believe in the Most Holy

Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, and I

believe all that the Holy Church of Rome believes.

Therefore with invocation and supplication of our lord

God, I make and ordain my testament. Let no one

violate my final (will).

- First I declare that I place my spirit and soul in the

hands of our lord God because he made it and redeemed

it with his precious blood. And my body I give to the

earth because from there it came.

- Secondly, I declare that I, named Ana Tiacapan, and

my late younger sister named Juana Teicuh who died,

shared the building of the house that is next to the ravine

(in Atlauhco?). And there the late Baltasar Nentequitl at-

tended to the rulers and traders of Amantlan (i.e., main-

tained a public house). And (Baltasar) declared when he

was about to die, “I cannot make a testament.” I declare

that there are two brothers-in-law of mine who know

about this because part of the stone (to make the house)

was brought from Tezcacoac, and the food that was used

and eaten when the house was built; (they know about it)

because (Tezcacoac? the house?) is their home.

- Thus I, Ana Tiacapan, declare that my illness is very

grave, and for this reason I make my testament.

Beginning my statement, I declare that the “woman's

house” that stands toward Xochimilco and faces east is

to be sold, and also the fruit trees, the pears and the figs

that are in the patio, all will be sold, and with the

proceeds masses will be said for all three of us. What I

have said will be sold belongs to the house.

- And I declare that the storeroom that is in the middle

(of the complex) belongs to someone named Juan

Piyoch, and I declare that another house (room) stands in

the direction of Mexico City, also attached to what was

the storeroom, and it belongs to Magdalena Tiacapan,

wife of Gabriel Maldonado, chief executor.

- And I declare that as to the house (room) that faces

toward Xochimilco and (the other one) attached to it,

which also faces toward Xochimilco, where (an image)

of our Lord stood, both belong to María Tlacoehua, wife

of don Juan García Tlacochcalcatzintli.

- And I declare that the great hall which also faces

Xochimilco, where people used to warm themselves, all

of it belongs to (my ?...) named Baltasar de San Fran-

cisco Iyacamecatzintli.

/f. 41v/ - And I declare that regarding the house that I

mentioned above that is to be sold, its land at the edge of

the water, the chinampas, just small (ones), not long, are

to be sold; it is all just part (of the house). Whoever

buys the house will pay for all of it, but if the person

buying the house doesn't come to agreement, the fruit

trees will belong to the church and will be used for the

friars. And I declare that the (three willows?) belong to

the church. And regarding how the houselot is (where

the buildings are), we have nothing to say about it. The

houselot will pertain to whoever will be in the house

there, that I said is to be sold. And concerning the land

(of the house) and where the chinampas are with their

dry land, we have nothing to say about that either. And

there are three men still living who know about this:

first, don Juan García Tlacochcalcatzintli; second, the

person named Baltasar Iyacamecatzintli; and third, the

person named Gabriel Maldonado, chief executor. They

know in what places their lands are. Thus the invalid

made her declaration, and she said to them “O my

children, this is all I have declared and what you who are

present and who will be named here have heard.”

- This is all that the invalid said in her statement before

the witnesses: María Tlacoehua, wife of don Juan

García; Ana, widow of Francisco Icicatiuh; Juana Xoco,

wife of Miguel Cerón, alguacil; Angelina, wife of Diego

Apachiuhqui; and the men before whom the document

was written were Francisco Huitlalocatl Acaçayol and

Domingo de San Lázaro.

- The testament was done by order of the lord Gabriel

Maldonado, chief executor.

- And I, Juan de San Pedro, appointed notary and exec-

utor, verify it; I place here my name and signature. Done

the 17th of the month of July of the year 1580.

Juan de San Pedro, appointed notary