Domingo Yaotl of Santa Ana Tlacuilocan

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, the heavenly lady, Holy Mary, eternally true

virgin, know all who see and read this document that I,

Domingo Yaotl, whose home is here in San Juan Evan-

gelista Culhuacan, in the ward of Santa Ana Tlacuilocan,

even though I am sick, nonetheless my spirit and soul are

undisturbed and sound. And I believe in the Most Holy

Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, of just one

essence. And I believe all that the Holy Church of Rome

believes. Therefore with invocation and supplication of

our lord God I make and order my testament and final

will.

- First I declare that I place my spirit and soul entirely in

the hands of our lord God, because he made it and re-

deemed it with his precious blood here on earth. And

my body I give to the earth. When my soul has left it,

my body will be buried at our church of San Juan

Evangelista.

- Second I declare in my statement that there is dry land

of mine in Ayauhtonco that is 20 matl long and also 20

matl wide. My field borders that of Juan Bautista,

church tepixqui. And I declare that I give it to my

wetnurse named Ana, the wife of Baltasar, (deceased?),

who is the daughter-in-law of Gerónimo Tlaxcalcecec,

citizen of Mexicatzinco (in the ward of) Acatzintitlan.

With this she will bring up my child. Let no one (disturb

her).

- And I declare that to my child named Andrés Ilpitoc I

give what I planted, the maize, the beans, and the ma-

gueys that are on the field of my mother. And the land is

my mother's property and I have nothing to do with it.

- And I declare that there is dry land of mine in

Tocititlan 20 matl long and also 20 matl wide. I give it

to my child named Andrés Ilpitoc.

- And I declare that there is dry land of ours, also in

Tocititlan, 80 (matl) long and 20 matl wide. My late

younger brother, who died, named Francisco Ayotoch,

shares it with me. And I declare it is to be sold and with

the proceeds masses will be said for both of us, for my

late younger brother and me, with which we will be

helped.

- And I declare that there are five chinampas of mine at

the edge of the water, not long but just small; I give them

to my child, and all that is planted there is to belong to

him, and my child Andrés Ilpitoc will be fed from it.

- And I say that I have a house that my late father gave

me, and now I in turn give it to my child; he will be there

(live there) if our Lord allows him to live.

- And I declare that I borrowed two tomines in money

from someone named Simón Yaotl. I have not yet paid

the debt. I borrowed one tomín in money from Agustín

Tetlanmecatl, /f. 38v/ and I have not yet paid it. And I

declare that my late wife had yarn that she was going to

make into something when she began to get sick and

then she died. She left behind what was to be a huipil;

she had woven (warped) all three lengths and had hand-

rubbed it. And I declare that it is to be sold, and with the

proceeds my debts of three tomines will be paid. And if

something is left over, it belongs to the boy named

Andrés.

- And I declare that there is a worn-out boat; it is to be

sold, and the proceeds will be used to help me be buried.

- And I have a hoe, a tool to work the soil, and a digging

stick with a metal tip, and also a knife, and two blankets

(with which I cover myself). I give all of this to my

child named Andrés Ilpitoc. And I declare concerning

the stone that is here that my stone is to be gathered

together, and if it amounts to a quappantli, it is to be

sold, and the proceeds are to be divided. One half will

belong to those who transport it, and the other part will

belong to the boy.

- And I declare that I have six magueys here at the

entrance. I give them to my child named Andrés Ilpitoc.

He is to scrape them (to get the juice), and it will be used

for him. Let no one violate my final will that I have

declared.

- This is all that the invalid named Domingo Yaotl said

in his declaration before the witnesses Francisco de San

Gerónimo Amiztlatoa and Miguel de Santiago,

alguaciles; Martín de San Lázaro Tlacochcalcatl; Pedro

Alvarez, church attendant; Juan Bautista, church

tepixqui; Pedro Núñez Texopanecatl; Agustín Vázquez

Tetlanmecatl; Mateo Juárez; and Simón Yaotl. (Done)

also before the women: Ana Tiacapan, widow of Juan

Bautista; Juana María, widow of Pedro Tepanecatl,

deceased; Juana Tiacapan, wife of Lázaro Amoyahual;

Ana Teicuh, wife of Mateo Juárez; Ana Teicuh; and

Juana Teicuh, widow of Pedro Atlacuil.

- This testament was done by the order of the executors,

Gabriel Maldonado, chief executor, and Martín de

Santiago and Antonio Jacobo, alguaciles. And I, Juan de

San Pedro, appointed notary, verify it; I place here my

name and signature. Done the 23rd of the month of July

of the year 1580.

Juan de San Pedro, appointed notary.