Juan Tezca

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother, the noble lady Holy Mary, know all who see and

read this document that I, Juan Tezca, whose home is

here in Culhuacan in the ward of Cihuatecpan, even

though I am ill, nonetheless my spirit and soul are

tranquil and healthy; and I truly believe in the Most Holy

Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, of just one

essence, and I believe all that the Holy Church of Rome

believes. Therefore now with invocation and

supplication of our lord God, I make and order this my

testament.

- First I declare that I give my spirit and soul to our lord

God, because he came to redeem it with his precious

blood here on earth. And my body I give to the earth

because from there it came. And when my soul has left

it, my body will be buried at our church of San Juan

Evangelista.

- Second I declare that I have my patrimonial land which

my grandfather Francisco T...huacatl left me; and the

land is in Xillotonco..., 40 (units of measure) long and 20

wide. And I declare that when I die, it is to be sold; with

half (of the proceeds) I will be buried, and with the

other, a mass will be said for me.

- And I declare that I have my level land, ten matl long

and six matl wide, and my house stands on it facing

west; and four chinampas which belong to the house are

behind it. And in front of the house there are two

(chinampas), each one with 10 furrows, and beside it

there are only six furrows. And I give all of it to my

wife Juana.

- And I declare that I have nine chinampas which my

father gave me, which are in Acatzintitlan, each one 20

furrows. And I declare that I am giving them to my wife

Juana.

- And I declare that I have seven chinampas that my

father left me, that are in Quauhtenanco, each one 20

furrows. And I declare that I am giving them to my wife

Juana.

/f. 13r/ ([The testator], from Santa María Magdalena,

has not died yet).

- And I declare that I have four chinampas with 10

furrows each, with their field (that goes with them), 20

matl long and 10 wide. And I declare that I am giving it

to my wife Juana.

- And also in Amaxac is my cultivated field, 10 matl on

all sides. And I declare that I am giving it to my wife

Juana.

- And I declare that in Xiloxochiatlauhco is my field 40

(units) long and 20 wide. And I declare I am giving it to

my wife.

- And I declare that in Chalcocalcan my field is of 40

(units). And I declare that I am giving it to my wife

Juana. It is next to the field of don Pedro Moysén.

- And I say that there is land in Xilomanco which we

divided among ourselves, three matl each, in order to

quarry stone. And my portion of the stone, that which is

(still) under ground, is to be used in the church of (the

ward of) Transfiguración, and what I have quarried will

be used for me, and with it I will be buried.

- This is all that the invalid declared, before the

witnesses Miguel de Santiago, Francisco Moysén, Juan

Bautista, Gerónimo de San Pablo, Andrés Garcia, and

Jacobo Malcoch. They did not put down their names

because they do not know how to write. Done the 15th

of the month of January of the year 1580.

Done before me, Alonso Dávila de Santiago, ap-

pointed notary.