Miguel García of Transfiguración Tlacatecco

- The testament of Miguel García

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and of his precious

mother the heavenly lady, Holy Mary, eternally virgin,

know all who see and read this document that I am

Miguel García, whose home is here in San Juan

Evangelista Culhuacan, of the ward of Transfiguración

Tlacatecco; even though my body is ill, nonetheless my

spirit and soul are undisturbed and sound. And I truly

believe in the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and God

the Holy Spirit, which are of just one essence. And I

believe all that the Holy Church of Rome believes.

Therefore now with invocation and supplication of God

our lord I make and order my testament and final will;

no one is to violate it.

- First I declare that I give my spirit and soul to God our

lord, because he made it and redeemed it with his pre-

cious blood here on earth. And my body I give to the

earth because from there it came; when my soul has left

it, my body will be buried at our church of San Juan

Evangelista.

- Here is how I order my testament so that no one will

violate my declaration when I die. Now I distribute my

houses and lands. I declare that I give the patrimonial

house that faces east, that my late father gave us, to my

grandchild and to my orphan that we adopted; my grand-

child is to take (the part of the house) toward Mexico

City and Juan, the orphan, is to take (the part) toward

Xochimilco. The two of them are just to share it; let no

one ever trick them.

- And the house where I lie faces toward Xochimilco. I

give it to my nephews Gabriel Nentlamati and his wife.

They will be (live) there. And the two new small houses

(rooms) will be sold and with the proceeds in money

debts will be paid. Or perhaps those who are demanding

my nephew Gabriel's property (the creditors) will just

buy them.

- And the three painted tecomates—one valued at one

peso, one valued at three tomines, and one worth four

tomines—will be sold together with the twelve unpainted

tecomates of mine. All 15 will be sold, and with the

proceeds in money our debts will be paid. And my two

hoes will be sold, and a closable chest with a lock will be

sold; one peso will be asked as its price. And my nephews

will keep (the money which represents) the price (of all

of it); if someone comes from somewhere asking (the

payment of) debts, with it (the debts) will be paid.

- And as to the six pesos in money that belong to

Hernando Juárez, whose home is Santa Ana, I paid it all

back; it was done in full public view. And we borrowed

a peso from the former (late?) wife of don Pedro Moysén

Macpalchiactzin, and it was paid back. And I have here

four tomines of Miguel Yaochoca's money; he is to pay

four tomines to Pedro Matlalatl, and I am in charge of

this, it will be paid. And the late mother of Pablo, whose

home is Itzcotla, borrowed a peso from Gregorio, and

Pablo, whom Miguel Jiménez, alcaide, maintains (in his

house), is to pay it.

- And the seven planks of mine and my granary

of planks and my writing desk and my inkpot with which

I wrote, all of it is to be sold in order for masses to be

said for us with the proceeds in money.

- And Magdalena, who was the wife of the late Tomás

Atecpanecatl, made as an offering six pesos in money to

buy wood for the church of the (ward of) Trans-

figuración. I kept it and borrowed it; it is to be paid back.

And we borrowed two pesos and four tomines from the

above mentioned old woman. It will also be paid back.

And my horse is always to be kept hired out to someone,

and that will pay (the price of the horse?). I entrust this

to my nephew Gabriel. Eight pesos and four tomines

have been paid publicly (toward buying the horse).

And four metates and five tubs and a large pot for

tamales are to be sold, and with the proceeds our debts

will be paid. And a book of hours, a breviary of mine,

three (breviaries?) in Nahuatl, and a confessional manual

are to be sold. The church attendants are to buy them.

And also three rosaries, after they are cleaned, will be

sold, and with all of it masses will be said for us. And

the four hens will be eaten here when I have died.

- And there is here some hammered gold that I was

keeping, property of the people of Coatlan, Cihuatecpan

and Tlacatecco, and the nobles of Mexicapan, and I went

to give it to our dear father the prior, fray Juan Núñez, by

the order of Alonso Jiménez and Juan de San Miguel;

they called him and told him, and he (the prior) simply

asked me for it.

- And as to my land at the edge of the water, the 10 chi-

nampas here at the entrance, and the seven (chinampas)

that are in Ayacac, I give (the chinampas) in both of

these places to my nephew Gabriel Nentlamati. And the

seven (chinampas) that are in San Pedro Çacaapan also

correspond to (are charged to) Gabriel; they are our

church land, next to the chinampas of the late Francisco

González.

- And in the land of Tlamacazco, there is also a church

field of ours, 20 (units of measure) long and the same on

all sides. And in Tocititlan there is a field of mine, 20

(units) round. And in Santiago Tetla there is a field of

mine 60 long, in (To?)natiuhco, next to the field of the

late Pedro Techachal. And there are 20 in Iczotitlan,

next to the field of Martín Yaotepitzin, and all these 120

I give to my nephew Gabriel Nentlamati. No one is ever

to take them from them or claim them from them.

- And as to a chisel and two awls and a plane and a saw

for cutting wood and an axe to split wood and a glass

cup worth three tomines and an image of the savior on

the cross and three retablo images and two elaborately

painted reed mats (petates) and four wooden pipes for

water, all of it will be sold and with the proceeds our

debts will be paid. This is all I order in my testament.

Let us be aided promptly, let everything I have men-

tioned with which the various (debts) are to be paid back

be sold quickly. The ward heads will speak for me,

along with my nephew /f. 57v/ Gabriel Nentlamati.

Done before the witnesses Martín (de Santaçion?);

Mateo Tlillancalqui; Francisco Atecpanecatl, tepixqui;

Juan Calnahuacatl Oticahuetztoc; Diego Hernández;

Gabriel Jiménez (poor person, orphan?); Antón Mimich,

Gregorio Moysén. And the women: the first is named

Magdalena Tiacapan, widow of Atecpanecatl; Ana,

widow of Pedro Icnoxochitl; Ana, widow of Lucas

Leonardo; Juana, widow of the late Martín Chahuatzin.

Done before Martín de Santiago, executor topile. I the

notary wrote it; here I place my name and signature.

Done today, Tuesday, the 20th day of the month of

December of the year 1580.

Done before me, Juan de San Pedro, appointed notary.