Ana Xoco of Santa Cruz

- Know all who see and read this document that I am

Ana Xoco, whose home is here in San Juan Evangelista

Culhuacan, belonging to the ward of Santa Cruz Tlal-

lachco; even though I am ill, nonetheless my spirit and

soul are sound and calm. I truly believe in the Most

Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, who

are of just one essence. And I believe in all that the Holy

Church of Rome believes. Therefore now with invo-

cation and supplication of God I make my testament.

- First I place my spirit and soul entirely in the hands of

God our lord, because he made it and redeemed it with

his precious blood here on earth. And my body I give to

the earth because from earth it came.

- And I declare that there are two (chinampas) at the

edge of the water where I used to be in Santa Cruz; the

judge Juan Gallego gave them to me. Each one is 20

(units of measure) long. I give them to my grandchild

Francisca; they will belong to her. And in Calpoltitlan

there are two (chinampas), land I bought; each one is 20

(units of measure) long. I gave twelve tomines for them.

I give them to my grandchild Magdalena. They will

belong to her, and she is to take them. And in Motlauh-

xauhcan there are eight (chinampas) next to the field of

the late Juan Quentli. I give them to my grandchildren,

my godchildren (or, my legitimate descendants?); each

one of the two, Magdalena and Cecilia, is to take four. I

make the (chinampas) their property. And in Ecatitlan,

in the land of Tzaqualco, there are 15 (chinampas). I

give five to Pedro Tepitz, and I give three to Bernabé,

and to Nicolás I give three, and I give two to Martín

Macehual, and I also give two to Rafael. And the hut

that stands where I used to be, next to the water, is to be

sold, and also the foundation wall is to be torn apart and

sold, (and the proceeds) will belong to me. The (hut) is

not big; perhaps one of the inhabitants there would like

to buy it, and the (proceeds) will be for me when I die.

And I give my grandchild Francisca a metate. And my

old boat I give to my son in law Diego Maçaihuitl, and I

give the narrow boat to María, the wife of Julián. No

one is to take it from her. That is all I say. Done before

the witnesses Francisco Gerónimo Amiztlatoa, Diego

Maçaihuitl, Miguel Quechol, Juan Huitztlacatl, Martín

Coaçacatl, Rafael Moysén, and Miguel García, whose

home is Coyoacan; and the women: María, wife of

Pedro Tepitz, María Tiacapan, Mónica Tiacapan, Isabel

Tiacapan; and before us, Miguel Josef and Pedro (de

San) Nicolás, executors.

- And all my women's things are to be sold in order for

masses to be said for me; none of it is to be wasted.

Miguel Jacobo de Maldonado, notary of the church.