Juana Tiacapan of (Tres) Reyes Coatlan

- Know all who see and read this document that I am

Juana Tiacapan, whose home is here in San Juan Evan-

gelista Culhuacan, belonging to the ward of Tres Reyes

Coatlan; even though I am ill, nonetheless my spirit and

soul are sound and undisturbed, and I very truly believe

in the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy

Spirit, of just one essence. And I believe all that the

Holy Church of Rome believes. Therefore now with

invocation and supplication of God our lord I make and

order my testament.

- First I say that I, Juana Tiacapan, place my spirit and

soul entirely in the hands of God our lord, because he

made it and redeemed it with his precious blood here on

earth. And my body I give to the earth because from

earth it came.

- And I declare that the house where I lie, which faces

east, will be sold (and the money) will belong to us, my

late husband Francisco and me, in order to aid our souls

with masses said for us. And everything up to where our

inheritance ends will go with the house, and the seven

small chinampas that accompany the house will also be

sold, and (the proceeds) will also belong to us, my

husband Francisco and me, in order to say masses for us.

- Also 55 magueys of mine will be sold (and the

proceeds) will be spent on me when I have died; masses

will be said for me with it. And concerning the ears of

corn, there are not many left, just half (a quauhacalli)

and a quauhacalli of last year's beans, and two tecomates

of beans that were harvested this year. All of it will be

sold in order to aid my soul.

- And the other house of mine, the new little house that

also faces east, I assign to my son-in-law Gaspar A-

chane. He is to take it because he has always helped me

greatly and took good care of me, and when I die it is

through him that I will (get along, have sufficient for

burial?); for this reason I give him the house.

- And as to 36 spindles with yarn and a round basket

with a handle, (full) of cotton, and three metates, and 12

beams (for building) huts (jacales), and a small met-

al tipped digging stick, and two large pots for tamales,

all of it will be sold, and with whatever the proceeds are,

masses will be said for me. This is all the declaration of

the invalid with which she ordered her testament before

the witnesses Juan Bautista Tlatol; Gaspar Achane; Mel-

chor Téllez Cihuatemoc; Marcos Coatecatl; and Andrés

Mizquitl. The women: Juana Ana, cihuatepixqui; Juana

Tiacapan; Juana Teicuh; Marta Tlaco; Lucía Teicuh.

- Here is what the invalid said afterwards: “There are

two pesos of mine in money; when I die I will be buried

with them.” Immediately we the executors searched for

it, and when the money was found it was counted pub-

licly; (it came to) nine pesos. And we ordered that for

however long the invalid should live, perhaps some part

will be used for her so that it will not be wasted, and

with one part her soul will be helped. Today, Monday,

the testament was written, the 2nd day of February of

1581.

- And I, Miguel Jacobo de Maldonado, notary of the

church, say that Juana Tiacapan ordered her testament

well and truly, and I wrote it; here I place my name and

signature.

Miguel Jacobo de Maldonado, appointed notary.