Antonio de San Francisco Tilocan

- The testament of Antonio de San Francisco Tlemachica

- In the name of our lord Jesus Christ and his dear moth-

er, the heavenly lady, Holy Mary, eternally virgin, know

all who see and read this document that I am named

Antonio de San Francisco Tlemachica, whose home is

here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan, belonging to

the ward of San Francisco Tlacatecpan, and even though

I am sick, nonetheless my spirit and soul are undisturbed

and healthy. And I truly believe in the Most Holy

Trinity, Father, Son, and God the Holy Spirit, of just

one essence. And I believe all that the Holy Church

of Rome believes. Therefore now with invocation and

supplication of God our lord, I make and order my

testament.

- First I say that I give my spirit and soul to our lord God

because he made it and redeemed it with his precious

blood here on earth. And my body I give to the earth

because from there it came; it is to be buried at our

church of San Juan Evangelista.

- Here is what concerns me so that I order my testament

on paper: I say that I give my house where I lie sick,

which faces west, to my niece named Bárbara Tlaco,

wife of Pablo de San Gabriel (Huitznahuatl); no one is to

take it from her. And there is another house of mine

which faces east. I give it to María Tiacapan, wife of

Baltasar Téllez. And I give her the enclosure; perhaps

they can roof it. Let no one ever dispute with them over

it, since I give it to them of my own free will.

- And I say that here at the entrance (of the house) there

are eight corner stones. The stones are large and

smoothly worked. They are to be sold, and with the

proceeds I will be buried when I have died. And there

are two metates of mine. They are to be sold and the

proceeds spent on me; it is to be used for me. And there

is a small chest that I give to my grandchildren; they can

put their clothing there. And the crucifix which stands

here is entirely my property. I say that it is not to be

taken anywhere but just stay at my home.

- And I say there are six chinampas of mine in Quauh-

tenanco. I give them to my niece María Tiacapan, wife

of Baltasar Téllez. And to my grandchild named Magda-

lena, I also give six (chinampas). In the third place, I am

distributing five (chinampas); I give them to another

granchild of mine named María. These chinampas of

mine are together with those in Quauhtenanco. Let no

one take from them what I distributed to them.

/f. 55v/ - And in (Tlallachco) there is a field of mine

which is 190 matl (in length), bordering the field of the

lord tlatoani don Juan Ramírez. It is behind the road and

facing Cuitlahuac. I am distributing in four parts the 190

(matl). I give 70 matl to my grandchildren named

Magdalena and Mónica; they are to share it. And to

Francisco Maxihuitl I give 40, and to his older sister

named Ana Tlaco I give 40. And to María Tiacapan,

wife of Baltasar Téllez, my niece, I give 40. Let no one

take it from them, let no one dispute it with them.

- There is dry land of mine in Tapalco of 200 (units of

measure); I divide it in two parts; 100 are to be sold, and

the proceeds in money are to belong to me; masses are to

be said for me with it. Let it be carried out promptly.

And the other 100 I give to my grandchildren. I divide

them in three parts: I give 40 to Francisco Maxihuitl; I

give 20 to his older sister named Ana Tlaco; I give 20 to

my niece, wife of Baltasar Téllez. And (the rest to come

to) 100 already belongs to my niece María, wife of

Baltasar Téllez, with which I am giving 40 to her.

- In San Lorenzo there is dry land of mine, 60 (units of

measure) in length and 20 in width; I am dividing (the

land) in two parts; I give 30 matl to my grandchild

named Magdalena, and I give 30 to Mónica; they are to

share these 60 (matl) that I have mentioned. Let no one

ever take it away from them.

- And in (Santa Bárbara) Quaxochco Chalcocalcan there

is dry land of mine 120 (units) long and in width 20.

With all my heart I say that I give and assign it to the

city, and perhaps the city elders, those in charge of

Culhuacan, will raise a cross there or build something

else there. They know what they will do. The length of

the land is still being investigated. And I say that

perhaps I will be given a grant of some part of it which

will be used for my children and grandchildren. And I

say that I sold five of my chinampas, each one 20 (units)

in length, to Juan Vázquez, regidor, whose home is Santa

Ana Tzapotla. And he gave me two pesos, four tomines.

The land borders the field of the late Juan Bautista

Huecamecatl. The money was used for me and I have

already made my chinampas his property. This is all I

say; let no one ever violate or dispute it. Here are named

the witnesses: the first is named Pablo de San Gabriel

Huitznahuatl tecuhtli; Francisco Huitlalocatzin; Juan

Vázquez, regidor; Juan de Alameda Quauhtli; Miguel

Cerón Tequanqualoc (Document 19); and also the lord

don Francisco Flores, alcalde, knows about it. And the

women: Bárbara Tlaco, wife of Pablo de San Gabriel

(Huitznahuatl); María (Tiacapan), wife of Baltasar

Téllez, Antonia, /f. 56r/ wife of Juan de Alameda;

Francisca, widow of Miguel Colhuacaçol; Ana Tlaco,

wife of Lázaro. Done before the executors Gabriel

Maldonado, Martín de San Diego, and Antón Jacobo.

And I, the notary, wrote the testament. Here I verify it

and set down my name and signature. Done the 23rd of

the month of July of the year 1580.

Juan de San Pedro, notary.