May the precious revered name of God the father, God his precious son, and God the Holy Spirit be entirely praised; may it be done, amen. Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.

Today, Saturday the 3rd day of the month of November of the year count of 1731, I named Isabel Maria, widow of Marcos Francisco, begin my testament in my tlaxilacalli of Santa Clara Cozcatlan. I say that I am very ill; if my precious father God calls me, I place my spirit and soul very entirely in the hands of my precious father God.

And my earthly body is to be wrapped in a habit of Carmen of serge, and I will be girt with the rope of my precious father San Francisco. And my grave is to be in the great church behind the holy cross.

And I say that the help of my spirit and soul is a high mass of requiem. And I say that the bells are to be rung for me in my tlaxilacalli. And I say that half a real is to be given for Holy Jerusalem. And I say that the bells are to be rung for me in Santa Maria de los Angeles Huitzillan, San Juan Bautista, San Diego, and San Sebastián; half a real is to be given for each.

And I say that I give to the cofradía of Ánimas one little maguey. And I say that to my daughter-in-law Cristina Ana I leave a soft wool skirt, and to my daughter Teresa Francisca I leave a soft huipil. I leave Cristina Ana here in the house with my two grandchildren, Javier Francisco and Gregoria Luisa.

The house that looks south is the home of God, the other looks west; I leave them to Cristina Ana as custodian, together with the land and some small magueyes. To Teresa Francisca I leave Santa Isabel and two furrows of small magueyes along the road.

And I say that to my godchild named Maria de la O I leave two small magueyes.

And I say that to another godchild of mine named Tiburcio I leave two magueyes. And I say that there is a huipil [in mixed style] that I gave four pesos for; [the money] is to be collected, and with that the mass for me is to be performed. And I say that I greatly implore those who are to speak on my behalf, don Matías Andrés and Lorenzo Hipólito, who are to be my executors. If they do it well, God will reward them. And I say I have nothing; I am very poor. And the witnesses who were called are Pedro de Santa María, witness; witness Diego Antonio Martínez; witness Joaquín Benito; and witness Nicolás de Santiago. And I say there are two animals, cows. Teresa Francisca is to take the small yellow cow; Cristina Ana is to take the other, the little mottled one. 

Before me the notary, Cipriano de Santiago.