Mateo Juárez of San Pedro Çacaapan

- In the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God

the Holy Spirit, just one true God in whom I believe, I

begin my testament. Know all who see and read this

document in which I ordain my testament that I, Mateo

Juárez, poor person (orphan?), whose home is here in

San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan, belonging to the ward

of San Pedro Çacaapan, first place my spirit and soul

entirely in the hands of God our lord because it is his

creation, and when I die, let him come to take it; let him

forgive me all my sins. And I say that I have no property

nor goods; I just begin my testament. No one is to

violate it. Here I will put in order what has been my

property.

- First I declare that there is a small house that faces

toward Xochimilco; when I die, it is to be sold and with

the proceeds masses will be said for me, and all the stone

of the wall and the stone that I bought is to be gathered

together and sold in order that masses be said for me.

- Second I declare that there is a digging stick with a

metal blade which I gave six tomines for. (Not long ago)

someone named Pedro Achane ruined it. Let me not

bother him, let him promptly give you four tomines in

order that masses be said for me. And I declare that the

hoe (same item as the digging stick?) is also to be sold in

order that I be buried; the price to be given you is a full

five tomines.

- And I give to my wife named Inés a row of (20?)

(inherited trees?) that my father and my mother left me.

And I give her the old boat; since we don't have any-

thing, she is to take that. It is in Tlecuilapa. And con-

cerning the other (row of trees?) my elder brother, the

regidor Juan, knows about it. The three of them are to

distribute them among themselves.

- “And we, the other three, are in agreement and say that

we cannot destroy (fractionalize) all that belongs to the

woman Inés, widow of Mateo Juárez, (including) the

chinampas. All that belongs to her (is in her charge); she

is only to take care of (the property) and attend to us as if

she were made our mother. This is all the agreement

(made by) me, Juan Vázquez Xallacatl, Juana Tiacapan,

and Juana Teicuh.” Done before the witnesses Anton

Atzacualcatl, Juan Acolnahuacatl, Juan Tocuiltecatl,

Domingo Tlacatecuhtli, Miguel Gabriel, Andrés

Cocoliloc, Juan Colhuatecuhtli. That is all, done before

us the executors-topileque, Antonio Xallacatl and Martín

Tlacatecpanecatl.

Done before me, Miguel García. Juan de San Pedro,

notary.