Juan Bautista

Memorandum concerning Juan Bautista of the ward of

Cihuatecpan

- First he declared, "I have seven chinampas in Acatzin-

titlan; Francisco Chimalquauh came to buy them from

me, and he gave me two pesos, four tomines (but it is not

enough?). He just fooled me; another peso is to be given

to me according to our agreement. If he does not want

(to give it to me), let my chinampas be sold to someone

(else).

- I also have seven chinampas in Acatzintitlan next to the

chinampas of Jacobo Martín Monel (?). And I declare

that I am giving them to my uncle, don Francisco Flores;

I assign them to him.

- In addition, there are eight chinampas of mine in

Cueptecco next to the chinampas of Juan Mimich and

Antón Teilpi. These are to be sold so that with the pro-

ceeds a mass will be said for me. My late father, Juan de

Santiago, gave it all to me.

- And there are seven chinampas of mine in Tlamaztonco

that my late uncle, Mateo Cecuitzin, left me. These too are

to be sold, and with the proceeds masses said for me.

- And I declare that I have a field in Ayauhtonco of 160

(units of measure); I give 60 to my uncle, don Francisco

Flores, and I also give 60 to my stepmother Magdalena.

And 40 are to be sold in order that with (the proceeds) a

mass will be said for us, for me and my father and

mother, because they left me the field.

/f. 16r/ Santa María Magdalena Cihuatecpan

- And there is a field of mine 20 (units) (square?) in San

Andrés. It is to be sold, and with the proceeds a mass is

to be said for me and my father and mother.

- And there is a field of mine in Tlallachco (measuring)

40 (units). I am not well acquainted with where the

patrimonial lands are there. I declare that if they are

found, let the noblemen aid me when they appear; let

them be sold and with (the proceeds) a mass be said for

me and my father and mother.

- And I borrowed two pesos of Miguel Techichino's

money, and when my field is sold, (from the proceeds)

will come the money to pay the debt.

- And there is a field of mine in Huixachtlan, the in-

heritance of my late father, (measuring) 20 (units). With

all my heart I declare that I am giving it to my uncle, don

Francisco Flores, alcalde. No one is to take it from him.

- This is the entire statement that the invalid made, before

the witnesses don Francisco Flores and Baltasar Cano.

Done the 5th of the month of February of the year 1580.

Done before me, Alonso Dávila de Santiago, ap-

pointed notary.