Juana Tiacapan of Santa María Asunción

Aticpac

- In the name of the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and

God the Holy Spirit, just one true God omnipotent, I

place my soul entirely in his hands. And when I die, let

God our lord carry me to him, because he redeemed my

soul and (it is made in) his image; and let my guardian

angel carry me before God. For I am Juana Tiacapan,

whose home is here in San Juan Evangelista Culhuacan,

in the ward of Santa María Asunción Aticpac; know all

who read and hear my testament that I keep nothing for

our lord God (i.e., I have nothing). I have no gold to

make offerings. I say this because here I order my testa-

ment.

- First I declare that where I lie sick, in the ward of Santa

Ana Iyauhtenco, my deceased father, Juan Yaotzin, left

me and gave me this houselot when he died. Now I

declare that I give it to my husband named Lázaro de

San Pablo, and I have addressed the people of Iyauhtenco,

and I said to them, “My husband will remain here among

you.” Also I declare that the houselot has its land at the

edge of the water, two chinampas that do not measure a

full 20 matl each, but just 10 each. And I give them to

my husband; no one is to take them from him. And I de-

clare also that my late father gave me seven chinampas

of his in Quauhtenanco, next to the road, on the far side

toward Coyoacan, next to the field of Agustín Patocicuil,

tepixqui. And now I in turn give them to my husband;

he will (pay tribute) on them. No one is to take them

away from him, because I assign them to him.

- And I declare that I have seven chinampas, my own

property, that were given to me when I was still un-

married; they are also in Quauhtenanco. I give them to

the ward heads, those of Iyauhtenco. Perhaps they will

give them to some poor person because (the land is obli-

gated for tribute?). With all my heart I leave it to them.

- And I declare that my late father gave me his field, 20

(units of measure) in length and the same in width. I

give it to my husband Lázaro de San Pablo. The field is

next to the field of Juan Bautista, church tepixqui. It is

in the place called Yahualiuhcan.

- And here in Coatlan there is dry land that my late father

gave me, his field. It is 20 (units of measure) long and

the same in width. I give it to my husband Lázaro de

San Pablo. No one is to take it from him.

- And in Santiago Tetla there is dry land of mine, 80

(units of measure long); it borders the field of Miguel de

Santiago, alguacil (in?) Texalpan. And I give it to my

husband, I assign all of it to him. No one is to take it

from him; he is to (pay tribute on it). /f. 47r/ And in San

Andrés Amaxac there is a field of mine, 20 (units of

measure) long, next to the field of Pedro Quiyauh. And I

give it to my husband.

- And I declare that when I die, the stone that is still

scattered here at the entrance is to be sold. The proceeds

in money are to be spent on my burial, and with one part

a mass will be said for me. My husband will speak for

me so that a mass is said for me quickly.

- And I declare that I have remembered that we have

debts of five pesos and six tomines and a cloak that have

not yet been paid. Two pesos belong to Pablo Tlamaca,

whose home is Mexico City (in the ward of) San Pablo;

they were spent for my late daughter named María when

she was in custody, and with it various things were paid

for. And three pesos and three tomines came from

Coyoacan, from San Agustín Palpan, belonging to Juan

Tepanecatl tecuhtli, whose home is Palpan. And three

tomines belong to Mateo Juárez, whose home is

Tlacatecco. And the cloak with which my late daughter

was enshrouded when she died belonged to Martín

Tlacochcalcatl Xochicuetzin. And as to all of our debts

that are written here, I declare that all of the stone that is

here is to be sold and with one part of the proceeds in

money our debts will be paid.

- And another thing I remembered: there is a field of

mine in Tocititlan, 20 (units of measure) in length and

also 20 wide, next to the field of Magdalena (Tiacapan),

widow of Pedro de la Cruz. I declare that the land is to

be sold in order to pay our debts. My husband knows

about this. This is all my testament; know all who see

and read this document that no one is to violate anything

that he (the notary) has written. Done before the wit-

nesses Hernando García, my brother-in-law, whose

home is Mexico City (in the ward of) San Pablo; Juan

Bautista, church tepixqui; Marcos Vázquez; and Pedro

Quiyauh; and before the women who heard it, the first

named Marta Teuhccho, the dear wife of Hernando

García; Ana Mocel, widow of Luis Xallacatl; Magdalena

(Tiacapan), widow of Pedro de la Cruz; Isabel Tiacapan,

wife of Pedro Quiyauh.

- (Done) before the executors who heard it, Martín de

Santiago and Anton Jacobo, alguaciles. I the notary

wrote the will. I place here my name and signature.

Done the 22nd of the month of August of the year 1580.

Juan de San Pedro, notary.